Just then from the doorway, as fat as shotes, Came the cake-walk princes in their long red coats, Canes with a brilliant lacquer shine, And tall silk hats that were red as wine.

And they pranced with their butterfly partners there, Coal-black maidens with pearls in their hair, Knee-skirts trimmed with the jassamine sweet, And bells on their ankles and little black-feet.

And the couples railed at the chant and the frown Of the witch-men lean, and laughed them down.

(O rare was the revel, and well worth while That made those glowering witch-men smile.

) The cake-walk royalty then began To walk for a cake that was tall as a man To the tune of “Boomlay, boomlay, BOOM,” While the witch-men laughed, with a sinister air, And sang with the scalawags prancing there: — “Walk with care, walk with care, Or Mumbo-Jumbo, God of the Congo, And all the other Gods of the Congo, Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you.

Beware, beware, walk with care, Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, boom.

Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, boom.

Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, boom.

Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, BOOM.

” Oh rare was the revel, and well worth while That made those glowering witch-men smile.

III.

THE HOPE OF THEIR RELIGION A good old negro in the slums of the town Preached at a sister for her velvet gown.

Howled at a brother for his low-down ways, His prowling, guzzling, sneak-thief days.

Beat on the Bible till he wore it out Starting the jubilee revival shout.

And some had visions, as they stood on chairs, And sang of Jacob, and the golden stairs, And they all repented, a thousand strong From their stupor and savagery and sin and wrong And slammed with their hymn books till they shook the room With “glory, glory, glory,” And “Boom, boom, BOOM.

” THEN I SAW THE CONGO, CREEPING THROUGH THE BLACK, CUTTING THROUGH THE FOREST WITH A GOLDEN TRACK.

And the gray sky opened like a new-rent veil And showed the Apostles with their coats of mail.

In bright white steel they were seated round And their fire-eyes watched where the Congo wound.

And the twelve Apostles, from their thrones on high Thrilled all the forest with their heavenly cry: — “Mumbo-Jumbo will die in the jungle; Never again will he hoo-doo you, Never again will he hoo-doo you.

” Then along that river, a thousand miles The vine-snared trees fell down in files.

Pioneer angels cleared the way For a Congo paradise, for babes at play, For sacred capitals, for temples clean.

Gone were the skull-faced witch-men lean.

There, where the wild ghost-gods had wailed A million boats of the angels sailed With oars of silver, and prows of blue And silken pennants that the sun shone through.

’Twas a land transfigured, ’twas a new creation.

Oh, a singing wind swept the negro nation And on through the backwoods clearing flew: — “Mumbo-Jumbo is dead in the jungle.

Never again will he hoo-doo you.

Never again will he hoo-doo you.

Redeemed were the forests, the beasts and the men, And only the vulture dared again By the far, lone mountains of the moon To cry, in the silence, the Congo tune:— “Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you, “Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you.

Mumbo .
