From the old Tupi warrior
The deaf voice in the throat
It makes confusing sounds,
Like the roars of a tiger,
That little by little it gets scared!
VIII
“Did you weep in the presence of death?

In the presence of strangers did you cry?

The coward does not descend from the strong;
Because you cried, my son you are not!
May you, accursed descendant
From a tribe of noble warriors,
Begging cruel outsiders,
Being prey to vile Aimorés.

“May you, isolated on earth,
Without support and without homeland wandering,
Rejected from death in war,
Rejected from men in peace,
To be the execrated specter of the people;
Don't find love in women,
Your friends, if you have friends,
Have a fickle and deceitful soul!
“Find no sweetness in the day,
Not even the colors of the dawn love you,
And among the larvae of the dark night
You can never rest enjoy:
Don't find a log, a stone,
Out in the sun, out in the rain and wind,
Suffering the greatest torments,
Where can your forehead land.

“May the grass grow at your feet;
Meadows wither, the flower fades,
And the stream that runs clear,
But the vesano fury ignites you;
Its waters quickly become,
To the contact of thirsty lips,
Impure lake of disgusting worms,
Whence festivities like disgust and terror!
“Ever the sky, like a burning ceiling,
Grow and punish your cursed limbs
And the ocean of blackened dust
Be the earth to the tupi ignavo!
Miserable, hungry, thirsty,
Manitôs do not speak to you in dreams,
And from horror the ghastly specters
Always bring the coward after you.

“A friend, don't be merciful
May your body on earth embalm me,
I put it in a careful clay pot
Bow and arrow and club at your feet!
Be cursed, and alone on earth;
For you have come to such vileness,
That in the presence of death you cried,
You, coward, my son are not.

IX
This saying, the old meserand
To whom does Tupã feel such pain, such fado?

Already at the ends of life I had reserved,
Go with trembling feet, with already cold hands
From your dark night to the dense darkness
Palpating.

- Alarm! alarm! - The old man stops.

The cry he heard is the son's voice,
Voice of war that you have heard so many times
On another, better block.

- Alarm! alarm!
— That moment is only worth erasing.

The long trances, the anguish,
That the cold heart tormented you
From a warrior and a father: - it's worth it, and more.

He who in so much pain had restrained himself,
Taken by the sudden contrast,
Dissolve now in copious tears,
May the weary heart rejuvenate.

The taba rumbles, the blows descend,
Screams, deep imprecations sound,
Tangled the raging crowd,
It revolves, it tangles confusedly,
And more revolt in mor fury is kindled.

And the sounds of blows that incessantly boil.

Voices, groans, death rattles
Go far through the mountain ranges
Of the human storm propagating
How many waves of angry people
Against a living rock they broke.

It was him, Tupi; it wasn't even fair
May the fame of the Tupi - the name, the glory,
Endured labor of so many years,
Last coat of arms of the extinct race,
In one jet and by one it would annihilate.

- Enough! cries the chief of the Timbiras,
"Enough, illustrious warrior!" you fought enough,
And for sacrifice you need strength.
