
1
WHere liues the man that neuer yet did heare
Of chast Penelope, Vlisses Queene?

VVho kept her faith vnspotted twenty yeere
Till he returnd that far away had beene,
And many men, and many townes had seene:
Ten yeere at siedge of Troy he lingring lay,
And ten yeere in the Midland-sea did stray.

2
Homer, to whom the Muses did carouse
A great deepe cup with heauenly Nectar filld,
The greatest, deepest cup in Ioues great house,
(For Ioue himselfe had so expresly willd)
He dranke of all, ne let one drop be spilld;
Since when, his braine that had before been dry,
Became the welspring of all Poetry.

3
Homer doth tell in his aboundant verse,
The long laborious trauailes of the man,
And of his Lady too he doth reherse,
How shee illudes with all the Art she can,
Th'vngratefull loue which other Lords began;
For of her Lord false Fame long since had sworne,
That Neptunes Monsters had his carcasse torne.

4
All this he tells, but one thing he forgot,
One thing, most worthy his eternall song,
But he was old, and blind, and saw it not,
Or else he thought he should Vlisses wrong,
To mingle it, his Tragick acts among.

Yet was there not in all the world of things,
A sweeter burden for his Muses wings.

5
The Courtly loue Antinous did make,
Antinous that fresh and iolly Knight,
Which of the gallants that did vndertake
To win the Widdow, had most wealth and might,
VVit to perswade, and beautie to delight.

The Courtly loue he made vnto the Queene,
Homer forgot as if it had not beene.

6
Sing then Terpsichore, my light Muse, sing
His gentle Art and cunning curtesie:
You Lady can remember euery thing
For you are daughter of Queene Memorie,
But sing a plaine and easie Melodie:
For the soft meane that warbleth but the ground,
To my rude eare doth yield the sweetest sound.

7
One onely nights discourse I can report,
VVhen the great Torch-bearer of heauen was gone
Downe in a maske vnto the Oceans Court,
To reuell it with Tethis all alone;
Antinous disguised and vnknowne
Like to the spring in gaudie Ornament
Vnto the Castle of the Princesse went.

8
The soueraigne Castle of the rocky Ile
