To learne their first disordred combating:
And, in a daunce such measure to obserue,
As all the world their motion should preserue.

18
Since when they still are carried in a round,
And changing come one in anothers place,
Yet doe they neyther mingle nor confound,
But euery one doth keepe the bounded space
VVherein the daunce doth bid it turne or trace:
This wondrous myracle did Loue deuise
For Dauncing is Loues proper exercise.

19
Like this, he fram'd the Gods eternall bower,
And of a shapelesse and confused masse
By his through-piercing and digesting power
The turning vault of heauen framed was:
VVhose starrie wheeles he hath so made to passe,
As that their mouings doe a musick frame
And they themselues, still daunce vnto the same.

20
Or if this (All) which round about we see
(As idle Morpheus some sicke braines hath taught)
Of vndeuided motes compacted bee,
How was this goodly Architecture wrought?

Or by what meanes were they together brought?

They erre that say they did concur by chaunce,
Loue made them meete in a well-ordered daunce.

21
As when Amphion with his charming Lire
Begot so sweet a Syren of the ayre,
That with her Rethorike made the stones conspire
The ruines of a Citty to repayre,
(A worke of wit and reasons wise affayre)
So loues smooth tongue, the motes such measure taught
That they ioyn'd hands, & so ye world was wrought.

22
How iustly then is Dauncing termed new
VVhich with the world in point of time begun?

Yea Time it selfe (whose birth Ioue neuer knew
And which is far more auncient then the Sun)
Had not one moment of his age outrunne
When out leapt Dauncing fro[m] the heape of things,
And lightly rode vpon his nimble wings.

23
Reason hath both their pictures in her Treasure,
VVhere Time the measure of all mouing is;
And Dauncing is a mouing all in measure,
Now if you doe resemble that to this
And think both one, I think you think amis:
But if you iudge them Twins, together got,
And Time first borne, your iudgment erreth not.

24
Thus doeth it equall age with age inioy,
And yet in lustie youth for euer flowers,
Like Loue his Sire, whom Paynters make a Boy,
Yet is he eldest of the heau'nly powers;
Or like his brother Time, whose winged howers
Going and comming will not let him dye,
But still preserue him in his infancie.

25
This sayd; the Queene with her sweet lips diuine
Gently began to moue the subtile ayre,
VVhich gladly yielding, did it selfe incline
To take a shape betweene those rubies fayre
And being formed, softly did repayre
With twenty doublings in the emptie way,
Vnto Antinous eares, and thus did say.

26
WHat eye doth see the heau'n but doth admire
When it the mouings of the heau'ns doth see?

My selfe, if I to heau'n may once aspire,
If that be dauncing, will a Dauncer be:
But as for this your frantick iollitie
How it began, or whence you did it learne,
I neuer could with reasons eye discerne.

27
Antinous aunswered: Iewell of the Earth
Worthie you are that heau'nly Daunce to leade:
But for you think our dauncing base of birth
And newly borne but of a brainsick head
I will forthwith his antique Gentry read,
And for I loue him, will his Herault be
And blaze his armes, and draw his Petigree.

28
Whe[n] Loue had shapt this world, this great faire wight
That all wights else in his wide womb containes
And had instructed it to daunce aright,
A thousand measures with a thousand straines,
VVhich it should practise with delightful paines
Vntill that fatall instant should reuolue,
VVhen all to nothing should againe resolue:
29
The comly order and proportion faire
On euery side did please his wandring eye,
Till glauncing through the thin transparent aire
A rude disordered rout he did espie
Of men and women, that most spightfullie
Did one another throng, and crowd so sore,
That his kind eye in pitty wept therefore.

30
And swifter then the Lightning downe he came,
Another shapelesse Chaos to digest,
He will begin another world to frame,
(For Loue till all be well will neuer rest)
Then with such words as cannot be exprest
He cutts the troups, that all a sunder fling,
And ere they wist, he casts them in a ring.

31
Then did he rarifie the Element
And in the center of the ring appeare,
The beames that from his forehead shining went,
Begot an horrour and religious feare
In all the soules that round about him weare,
VVhich in their eares attentiuenesse procures
While he with such like sounds their minds allures.

32
