Or else the March, when all the troups aduance
Vnto the Drum, in gallant order daunce.

88
And after warrs, when white-wing'd victory
Is with a glorious tryumph beautified,
And euery one doth Io Io cry,
VVhiles all in gold the Conquerour doth ride,
The solemne pompe that fils the Citty wide
Obserues such ranke and measure euery where,
As if they altogether dauncing were.

89
The like iust order Mourners doe obserue,
(But with vnlike affection and attire)
VVhen some great man that nobly did deserue
And whom his friends impatiently desire
Is brought with honour to his latest fire:
The dead corps too in that sad daunce is mou'd,
As if both dead and liuing, dauncing lou'd.

90
A diuerse cause, but like solemnitie
Vnto the Temple leades the bashfull bride,
VVhich blusheth like the Indian Iuorie
VVhich is with dip of Tyrian purple died:
A golden troope doth passe on euery side
Of flourishing young men and Virgins gay,
Which keepe faire measure all the flowry way.

91
And not alone the generall multitude,
But those choise Nestors which in counsell graue
Of Citties, and of Kingdomes doe conclude,
Most comly order in their Sessions haue:
Wherefore the wise Thessalians euer gaue
The name of Leader of their Countries daunce
To him that had their Countries gouernaunce.

92
And those great Maisters of the liberall Arts
In all their seuerall Schooles doe Dauncing teach:
For humble Grammer first doth set the parts
Of congruent and well-according speach:
Which Rhetorick whose state ye clouds doth reach,
And heau'nly Poetry doe forward lead,
And diuers Measures, diuersly doe tread.

93
For Rhetorick clothing speech in rich aray
In looser numbers teacheth her to range,
VVith twentie tropes, and turning euery way,
And various figures, and licentious change:
But Poetry with rule and order strange
So curiously doth moue each single pace,
As all is mard if she one foote misplace.

94
These Arts of speach the guides and Marshals are,
But Logick leadeth Reason in a Daunce,
(Reason the Cynosure and bright Load-star
In this worlds Sea t'auoid the rock of Chaunce)
For with close following and continuance
One reason doth another so ensue,
As in conclusion still the daunce is true.

95
So Musick to her owne sweet tunes doth trip
VVith tricks of, 3, 5, 8, 15, and more:
So doth the Art of Numbring seeme to skip
From eu'n to odd in her proportion'd score:
So doe those skils whose quick eyes doe explore
The iust dimension both of earth and heau'n
In all their rules obserue a measure eu'n.

96
Loe this is Dauncings true nobilitie.

Dauncing the child of Musick and of Loue,
Dauncing it selfe both loue and harmony,
VVhere all agree, and all in order moue;
Dauncing the Art that all Arts doe approue:
The faire Caracter of the worlds consent,
The heau'ns true figure, and th'earths ornament.

97
TH E Queene, whose dainty eares had borne too long
The tedious praise of yt she did despise,
Adding once more the musick of the tongue
To the sweet speech of her alluring eyes,
Began to aunswer in such winning wise
As that forthwith Antinous tongue was tyde,
His eyes fast fixt, his eares were open wide.

98
Forsooth (quoth she) great glory you haue won
To your trim Minion Dauncing all this while,
By blazing him Loues first begotten sonne;
Of euery ill the hatefull Father vile
That doth the world with sorceries beguile:
Cunningly mad, religiously prophane,
Wits monster, Reasons canker, Sences bane.

99
Loue taught the mother that vnkind desire
To wash her hands in her owne Infants blood;
Loue taught the daughter to betray her Sire
Into most base vnworthy seruitude;
Loue taught the brothers, that the all-seeing Sun
To feast his brothers, that the all-seeing Sun
Wrapt in a clowd, that wicked sight did shun.

100
And euen this selfe same Loue hath dauncing taught,
An Art that sheweth th'Idea of his mind
VVith vainesse, frenzie, and misorder fraught;
Sometimes with blood and cruelties vnkind:
For in a daunce, Tereus mad wife did finde
Fit time and place by murthering her sonne,
T'auenge the wrong his trayterous Sire had done.

101
What meane the Mermayds when they daunce and sing
But certaine death vnto the Mariner?

VVhat tydings doe the dauncing Dilphins bring
But that some dangerous storme approcheth nere?

Then sith both Loue & Dauncing lyueries beare
Of such ill hap, vnhappy may they proue,
That sitting free, will either daunce or loue.

102
YEt once againe Antinous did reply,
Great Queene, condemne not Loue the innocent,
For this mischieuous lust, which traiterously
Vsurps his Name, and steales his ornament:
For that true Loue which dauncing did inuent,
Is he that tun'd the worlds whole harmony,
And linkt all men in sweet societie.

103
He first extracted from th'earth-mingled mind
That heau'nly fire, or quintessence diuine,
VVhich doth such simpathy in beauty find
As is betweene the Elme and fruitfull Vine,
And so to beautie euer doth encline.

Liues life it is, and cordiall to the hart,
And of our better part, the better part.

104
Thys is true Loue, by that true Cupid got
VVhich daunceth Galliards in your amorous eyes,
But to your frozen hart approcheth not,
Onely your hart he dares not enterprize.

And yet through euery other part he flyes,
And euery where he nimbly daunceth now.

That in your selfe, your selfe percieue not how.

105
For your sweet beauty daintily transfus'd
VVith due proportion throughout euery part,
VVhat is it but a daunce where Loue hath vs'd
His finer cunning, and more curuous Art?

VVhere all the Elements themselues impart,
And turne, and wind, & mingle with such measure,
That th'eye that sees it, sufeits with the pleasure.

106
Loue in the twinckling of your eylids daunceth,
Loue daunceth in your pulses and your vaines,
Loue whe[n] you sow your needles poynt aduaunceth,
And makes it daunce a thousand curious straines
Of winding rounds, whereof the forme remaines,
To shew, that your faire hands can daunce ye Hey,
VVhich your fine feet would learne as well as they.

107
And when your Iuory fingers touch the strings
Of any siluer-sounding instrument,
Loue makes the[m] daunce to those sweet murmurings,
VVith busie skill, and cunning excellent:
O that your feet those tunes would represent
With artificiall motions to and fro,
That Loue this Art in euery part might shoe.

108
Yet your faire soule which came from heau'n aboue,
To rule thys house, another heau'n below,
VVith diuers powers in harmony doth moue,
And all the vertues that from her doe flow,
In a round measure hand in hand doe goe.

Could I now see as I conceiue thys Daunce,
VVonder and Loue would cast me in a traunce.

109
The richest Iewell in all the heau'nly Treasure
That euer yet vnto the Earth was showne,
Is perfect Concord, th'onely perfect pleasure
That wretched Earth-borne men haue euer knowne,
For many harts it doth compound in one:
That what so one doth will, or speake, or doe,
VVith one consent they all agree thereto.

110
Concords true picture shineth in thys Art,
VVhere diuers men and women ranked be,
And euery one doth daunce a seuerall part,
Yet all as one, in measure doe agree,
Obseruing perfect vniformitie:
All turne together, all together trace,
And all together honor and embrace.

111
If they whom sacred Loue hath link'd in one,
Doe, as they daunce, in all theyr course of life
Neuer shall burning griefe nor bitter mone,
Nor factious difference, nor vnkind strife,
Arise betwixt the husband and the wife.

For whether forth or back, or round he goe,
As the man doth, so must the woman doe.

112
VVhat if by often enterchaunge of place
Sometime the woman get the vpper hand?

That is but done for more delightfull grace,
For on that part shee doth not euer stand:
But as the Measures law doth her commaund
Shee wheeles about, and ere the daunce doth end,
Into her former place shee doth transcend.

113
But not alone this correspondence meet
And vniforme consent doth dauncing praise,
For Comlines the chyld of order sweet
Enamels it with her eye-pleasing raies:
Faire Comlines, ten hundred thousand waies
Through dauncing shedds it selfe, & makes it shine
VVith glorious beauty, and with grace diuine.

114
For Comlines is a disposing faire
Of things and actions in fit time and place,
VVhich doth in dauncing shew it selfe most cleere,
VVhe[n] troopes confus'd which here & there do trace
VVithout distinguishment or bounded space,
By dauncing rule, into such ranks are brought,
As glads the eye, and rauisheth the thought.

115
Then why should reason iudge that reasonles
VVhich is wits of-spring, and the worke of Art,
Image of concord, and of comlines.

VVho sees a clock moouing in euery part,
A sayling Pinnesse, or a wheeling Cart,
But thinks that reason ere it came to passe
The first impulsiue cause and mouer was?

116
VVho sees an Armie all in ranke aduaunce
But deemes a wise Commaunder is in place
Which leadeth on that braue victorious daunce?

Much more in dauncings Art, in dauncings grace
Blindnes it selfe may reasons footstep trace:
For of Loues Maze it is the curious plot,
And of mans fellowship the true-loue knot.

117
But if these eyes of yours, (Load-starrs of loue
Shewing the worlds great daunce to your minds eye)
Cannot with all theyr demonstrations moue
Kind apprehension in your fantasie
Of Dauncings vertue, and nobilitie:
How can my barbarous tongue win you thereto
Which heau'n & earths faire speech could neuer do?

118
O Loue my King: If all my wit and power
Haue done you all the seruice that they can,
O be you present in this present hower,
And helpe your seruant and your true Leige-man
End that perswasion which I earst began:
For who in praise of dauncing can perswade
With such sweet force as Loue, wc dauncing made.

119
LOue heard his prayer, and swifter then the wind
Like to a page, in habit, face, and speech,
He came, and stood Antinous behind,
And many secrets to his thoughts did teach.

At last, a christall Mirrour he did reach
Vnto his hands, that he with one rash view,
All formes therein by Loues reuealing knew.

120
And humbly honoring, gaue it to the Queene
With this faire speech: See fairest Queene (quoth he)
The fairest sight that euer shall be seene,
And th'onely wonder of posteritie,
The richest worke in Natures treasury;
VVhich she disdaines to shew on this worlds stage,
And thinks it far too good for our rude age.

121
But in another world deuided far,
In the great, fortunate, triangled Isle,
Thrise twelue degrees remou'd from the North star
Shee will this glorious workmanship compile
Which shee hath been conceiuing all thys while
Since the worlds birth, & will bring forth at last,
When sixe and twenty hundreth yeeres are past.

122
PEnelope the Queene when she had view'd
The strange-eye-dazeling-admirable sight,
Faine would haue praisd the state and pulchritude,
But she was stroken dumbe with wonder quite,
Yet her sweet mind retayn'd her thinking might:
Her rauisht minde in heau'nly thoughts did dwel,
But what she thought, no mortall tongue can tell.

123
You Lady Muse, whom Ioue the Counsellour
