Put reasons noble squadron to the rout?

Or how should you that haue the gouernance
Of Natures children, heauen and earth throughout
Prescribe them rules, and liue your selues without?

VVhy should your fellowship a trouble be,
Since mans chiefe pleasure is societie?

33
If sence hath not yet taught you, learne of me
A comly moderation and discreet,
That your assemblies may well ordered be
VVhen my vniting power shall make you meet,
VVith heau'nly tunes it shall be tempered sweet:
And be the modell of the worlds great frame,
And you Earths children, Dauncing shall it name.

34
Behold the world how it is whirled round,
And for it is so whirl'd, is named so;
In whose large volume many rules are found
Of this new Art, which it doth fairely show:
For your quick eyes in wandring too and fro
From East to West, on no one thing can glaunce,
But if you make it well, it seemes to daunce.

35
First you see in this huge mirrour blew
Of trembling lights a number numberlesse,
Fixt they are nam'd, but with a name vntrue,
For they are moued, and in a Daunce expresse
That great long yeare that doth containe no lesse
Then threescore hundreths of those yeares in all
Which the Sunne makes with his course naturall.

36
VVhat if to you these sparks disordered seeme
As if by chaunce they had been scattered there?

The Gods a solemn measure doe it deeme
And see a iust proportion euery where,
And know ye points whence first their mouings were;
To which first points when all returne againe,
The Axeltree of Heau'n shall breake in twaine.

37
Vnder that spangled skye, fiue wandring flames,
Besides the King of Day, and Queene of Night,
Are wheel'd around, all in their sundry frames,
And all in sundry measures doe delight:
Yet altogether keepe no measure right.

For by it selfe, each doth it selfe aduaunce,
And by it selfe, each doth a Galliard daunce.

38
Venus the Mother of that bastard Loue
Which doth vsurpe the worlds great Marshals name,
Iust with the Sunne her dainty feete doth moue
And vnto him doth all her iestures frame:
Now after, now afore, the flattering Dame
VVith diuers cunning passages doth erre,
Still him respecting that respects not her.

39
For that braue Sunne the Father of the Day,
Doth loue this Earth the Mother of the Night,
And like a reuellour in rich aray
Doth daunce his Galliard in his Lemmans sight,
Both back, and forth, and side-wayes passing light,
His gallant grace doth so the Gods amaze,
That all stand still and at his beautie gaze.

40
But see the Earth, when she approcheth neere,
How she for ioy doth spring and sweetly smile:
But see againe her sad and heauie cheere
When changing places he retires a while:
But those black clouds he shortly will exile,
And make them all before his presence flye
As mists consum'd before his cheerfull eye.

41
VVho doth not see the measures of the Moone
Which thirteene times she daunceth euery yeare?

And ends her pauine thirteene times as soone
As doth her brother, of whose golden heire
She borroweth part and proudly doth it weare.

Then doth she coylie turne her face aside,
That halfe her cheeke is scarce sometimes discride.

42
Next her, the pure, subtile, and cleansing fire,
Is swiftly carried in a circle euen:
Though Vulcan be pronounst by many a lyer
The onely halting God that dwells in heauen.

But that foule name may be more fitly giuen
To your false fier that far from heau'n is fall
And doth consume, wast, spoile, disorder all.

43
And now behold your tender Nurse the ayre
And common neighbour that ay runns around,
How many pictues and impressions faire
Within her emptie regions are there found,
Which to your sences Dauncing doe propound?

For what are breath, speech, Ecchos, musick, winds,
But Dauncings of the ayre in sundry kinds?

44
For when you breath, the ayre in order moues,
Now in, now out, in time and measure trew;
And when you speake, so well the dauncing loues,
That doubling oft, and oft redoubling new,
With thousand formes she doth her selfe endew:
For all the words that from your lips repaire,
Are naught but tricks and turnings of the aire.

45
Hence is her pratling daughter Eccho borne,
That daunces to all voyces she can heare,
There is no sound so harsh that she doth scorne,
Nor any time wherein she will forbeare
The aiery pauement with her feete to weare.

And yet her hearing sence is nothing quick
For after time she endeth euery trick.

46
And thou sweet Musick, Dauncings only life
The eares sole happines, the ayres best speach,
Loadstone of fellowship, charming rod of strife,
The soft minds Paradice, the sick minds Leach,
With thine owne tongue yt trees & stones canst teach
That whe[n] the Aire doth daunce her finest measure,
Then art [thou] borne the Gods & mens sweet pleasure.

47
Lastly, where keepe the winds their reuelry
Their violent turnings and wild whirling hayes?

But in the Ayres tralucent gallery?

Where she her selfe is turnd a hundreth wayes,
While with those Maskers wantonly she playes;
Yet in this misrule, they such rule embrace
As two at once encomber not the place.

48
If then fier, ayre, wandring and fixed lights
In euery prouince of th'imperiall skye,
Yeeld perfect formes of dauncing to your sights,
In vaine I teach the eare, that which the eye
With certaine view already doth descrie.

But for your eyes perceiue not all they see
In this I will your sences maister bee.

49
For loe the Sea that fleets about the Land,
And like a girdle clips her solide wast,
Musick and measure both doth vnderstand:
For his great Christall eye is alwayes cast
Vp to the Moone, and oft her fixeth fast.

And as she daunceth in her pallid spheere,
So daunceth he about the Center heere.

50
Sometimes his proud greene waues in order set,
One after other flow vnto the shore,
Which when they haue with many kisses wet,
They ebb away in order as before;
And to make knowne his Courtly Loue the more,
He oft doth lay aside his three-forkt Mace,
And with his armes the timerous Earth embrace.

51
Onely the Earth doth stand for euer still,
Her rocks remoue not, nor her mountaines meete,
(Although some witts enricht with Learnings skill
Say heau'n stands firme, & that the Earth doth fleete
And swiftly turneth vnderneath their feet)
Yet though the Earth is euer stedfast seene,
On her broad breast hath Dauncing euer beene.

52
For those blew vaines that through her body spred,
Those saphire streams which fro[m] great hils do spring,
(The Earths great duggs: for euery wight is fed
With sweet fresh moisture from them issuing)
Obserue a daunce in their wild wandering:
And still their daunce begets a murmur sweete,
And still the murmur with the daunce doth meete.

53
Of all their wayes I loue Meanders path,
Which to the tunes of dying Swans doth daunce,
Such winding sleights, such turnes and tricks he hath,
Such Creekes, such wrenches, and such daliaunce,
That whether it be hap or heedlesse chaunce,
In his indented course and wringling play
He seemes to daunce a perfect cunning Hay.

54
But wherefore doe these streames for euer runne?

To keepe themselues for euer sweet and cleare:
For let their euerlasting course be donne
They straight corrupt and foule with mud appeare.

O yee sweet Nimphs that beauties losse doe feare,
Contemne the Drugs that Phisick doth deuise,
And learne of Loue this dainty exercise.

55
See how those flowers that haue sweet Beauty too
(The onely Iewels that the Earth doth weare
VVhen the young Sunne in brauery her doth woo)
As oft as they the whistling wind doth heare,
Doe waue their tender bodies here and there;
And though their daunce no perfect measure is,
Yet oftentimes their musick makes them kis[.

56
VVhat makes the Vine about the Elme to daunce
With turnings, windings, and imbracements round?

What makes the Load-stone to the North aduaunce
His subtile point, as if from thence he found
His chiefe attractiue Vertue to redound?

Kind Nature first doth cause all things to loue,
Loue makes them daunce and in iust order moue.

57
Harke how the Birds doe sing, and marke then how
Iumpe with the modulation of their layes,
They lightly leape, and skip from bow to bow;
Yet doe the Cranes deserue a greater prayse
Which keepe such measure in their ayrie wayes,
As when they all in order ranked are,
They make a perfect forme trianguler:
58
In the chiefe angle flyes the watchfull guide,
And all the followers their heads doe lay
On their forgoers backs, on eyther side,
But for the Captaine hath no rest to stay
His head forwearied with the windy way,
He back retires, and then the next behind,
As his Lieutenaunt leads them through the wind.

59
But why relate I euery singular?

Since all the worlds great fortunes and affaires
Forward and backward rapt and whurled are,
According to the musick of the spheares:
And Chaunce her selfe, her nimble feete vpbeares
On a round slipperie wheele that rowleth ay,
And turnes all states with her impetuous sway.

60
Learne then to daunce you that are Princes borne
And lawfull Lords of earthly creatures all,
Imitate them, and thereof take no scorne,
For thys new Art to them is naturall
And imitate the starres cælestiall.

For when pale Death you[r] vitall twist shall seuer,
Your better parts must daunce with the[m] for euer.

61
Thus Loue perswades, and all the crowne of men
That stands around doth make a murmuring;
As when the wind loosd from his hollow den,
Among the trees a gentle base doth sing,
Or as a Brooke through peebles wandering:
But in their lookes they vttered this plaine speach,
That they wold learn to daunce if loue wold teach.

62
Then first of all, hee doth demonstrate plaine
The motions seauen that are in nature found,
Vpward, and downward, forth, and back againe,
To this side, and to that, and turning round:
VVhereof, a thousand brawles he doth compound,
VVhich he doth teach vnto the multitude,
And euer with a turne they must conclude.

63
As when a Nimph arysing from the Land
Leadeth a daunce with her long watery traine
Downe to the Sea, she wries to euery hand
And euery way doth crosse the fertile plaine:
But when at last she falls into the maine
Then all her trauerses concluded are,
And with the Sea her course is circulare.

64
Thus when at first Loue had them marshalled
As earst he did the shapelesse masse of things,
He taught them rounds and winding Heyes to tread,
And about trees to cast themselues in rings.

As the two Beares whom the first mouer flings
With a short turne about heauens Axeltree,
In a round daunce for euer wheeling bee.

65
But after these, as men more ciuill grew
He did more graue and solemne measures frame,
With such faire order and proportion trew
And correspondence euery way the same,
That no fault finding eye did euer blame:
For euery eye was moued at the sight
With sober wondring, and with sweet delight.

66
Not those old Students of the heauenly booke,
Atlas the great, Promethius the wise,
VVhich on the Starres did al their lyfe-time looke
Could euer find such measures in the skies,
So full of change and rare varieties;
Yet all the feete whereon these measures goe,
Are onely Spondeis, solemne, graue, and sloe.

70 [67]
But for more diuers and more pleasing show,
A swift and wandring daunce she did inuent,
VVith passages vncertaine to and fro,
Yet with a certaine aunswere and consent
To the quick musick of the Instrument.

Fiue was the number of the Musicks feete,
Which still the daunce did with fiue paces meete.

71 [68]
A gallant daunce, that liuely doth bewray
A spirit and a vertue Masculine,
Impatient that her house on earth should stay
Since she her selfe is fierie and diuine:
Oft doth she make her body vpward flyne,
With loftie turnes and capriols in the ayre,
Which with the lustie tunes accordeth fayre.

69
VVhat shall I name those currant trauases
That on a triple Dactyle foote doe run
Close by the ground with slyding passages,
VVherein that Dauncer greatest prayse hath won
Which with best order can all orders shun:
For euery where he wantonly must range,
And turne and wind, with vnexpected change.

70
Yet is ther one the most delightfull kind,
A lofty iumping, or a leaping round,
VVhere arme in arme, two Dauncers are entwind,
And whirle themselues with strict embracements bound,
And still their feet an Anapest do sound:
An Anapest is all theyr musicks song,
VVhose first two feet are short, & third is long.

71
As the victorious twinns of Læda and Ioue
That taught the Spartans dauncing on the sands,
Of swift Eurotas daunce in Heau'n aboue,
Knit and vnited with eternall hands;
Among the Starres their double Image stands,
VVhere both are carried with an equall pace
Together iumping in their turning race.

72
Thys is the Net wherein the Sunns bright eye
Venus and Mars entangled did behold,
For in thys Daunce, their armes they so imply
As each, doth seeme the other to enfold:
VVhat if lewd wits another tale haue told
Of iealous Vulcan, and of yron chaynes,
Yet this true sence that forged lye containes.

73
These various formes of dauncing Loue did frame,
And beside these, a hundred millions moe,
And as he did inuent, he taught the same
VVith goodly iesture, and with comly show,
Now keeping state, now humbly honoring low,
And euer for the persons and the place
He taught most fit, and best according grace.

74
For Loue, within his fertile working braine
Did then conceiue those gracious Virgins three
VVhose ciuill moderation did maintaine
All decent order and conveniencie,
And faire respect, and seemlie modestie:
And then he thought it fit they should be borne,
That their sweet presence dauncing might adorne.

75
Hence is it that these Graces painted are
With hand in hand, dauncing an endlesse round:
And with regarding eyes, that still beware
That there be no disgrace amongst the found;
VVith equall foote they beate the flowry ground,
Laughing, or singing, as their passions will,
Yet nothing that they doe becomes them ill.

76
Thus Loue taught men, and men thus learnd of Loue
Sweet Musicks sound with feete to counterfaite,
VVhich was long time before high thundering Ioue
VVas lifted vp to heau'ns imperiall seate.

For though by birth he were the Prince of Creete,
Nor Creete, nor Heau'n, should ye yong Prince haue seen
If Dancers with their Timbrels had not been.

77
Since when all cermonious misteries,
All sacred Orgies and religious rights,
All pomps, and tryumphs, and solemnities,
All Funerals, Nuptials, and like publike sights,
All Parliaments of peace, and warlike fights,
Al learned Arts, and euery great affaire
A liuely shape of Dauncing seemes to beare.

78
For what did he who with his ten-tong'd Lute
Gaue Beasts and blocks an vnderstanding eare?

Or rather into bestiall minds and brute
Shed and infus'd the beames of reason cleare?

Doubtlesse for men that rude and sauage were
A ciuill forme of dauncing he deuis'd,
VVherewith vnto their Gods they sacrific'd.

79
So did Musæus, so Amphion did,
And Linus with his sweet enchanting song,
And he whose hand the earth of monsters rid
And had mens eares fast chained to his tong:
And Theseus to his wood-borne slaues among
Vs'd dauncing as the finest pollicie
To plant religion and societie.

80
And therefore now the Thracian Orpheus Lire
And Hercules him selfe are stellified;
And in high heau'n amidst the starry Quire
Dauncing their parts continually doe slide:
So on the Zodiake Ganimede doth ride,
And so is Hebe with the Muses nine
For pleasing Ioue with dauncing, made diuine.

81
VVherefore was Proteus sayd himselfe to change
Into a streame, a Lyon, and a tree,
And many other formes fantastique strange
As in his fickle thought he wisht to be?

But that he daunc'd with such facilitie.

As like a Lyon he could pace with pride,
Ply like a Plant, and like a Riuer slide.

82
And how was Cæneus made at first a man,
And then a woman, then a man againe
But in a Daunce?

which when he first began
Hee the mans part in measure did sustaine
But when he chang'd into a second swaine
He daunc'd the womans part another space
And then return'd into his former place.

83
Hence sprang the fable of Tiresias
That he the pleasure of both sexes tryde:
For in a daunce hee man and woman was
By often chaunge of place from side to side:
But for the woman easily did slide
And smoothly swim with cunning hidden Art,
Hee tooke more pleasure in a woman's part.

84
So to a fish Venus herselfe did change,
And swimming through the soft and yeelding waue,
VVith gentle motions did so smoothly range
As none might see where she the water draue:
But this plaine truth that falsed fable gaue
That she did daunce with slyding easines,
Plyant and quick in wandring passages,
85
And merry Bacchus practis'd dauncing to,
And to the Lydian numbers rounds did make:
The like he did in th'Easterne India doo,
And taught them all when Phœbus did awake,
And when at night he did his Coach forsake:
To honor heau'n, and heau'ns great roling eie
VVith turning daunces, and with melodie.

86
Thus they who first did found a common-weale,
And they who first Religion did ordaine,
By dauncing first the peoples harts did steale,
Of whom we now a thousand tales doe faine.

Yet doe we now their perfect rules retaine,
And vse then still in such deuises new
As in the world long since their withering grew.

87
For after Townes and Kingdomes founded were
Betweene great States arose well-ordered war,
VVherein most perfect measure doth appeare
VVhether their well set ranks respected are
