Shone with a thousand Lamps, which did exile
The dim darke shades, & turn'd the night to day,
Not Ioues blew Tent what time the Sunny ray
Behind the bulwarke of the earth retires
Is seene to sparkle with more twinckling fiers.

9
That night the Queene came forth from far within,
And in the presence of her Court was seene,
For the sweet singer Phemius did begin
To praise the Worthies that at Troy had beene;
Somewhat of her Vlisses she did weene
In his graue Hymne the heau'nly man would sing,
Or of his warres, or of his wandering.

10
Pallas that houre with her sweet breath diuine
Inspir'd immortall beautie in her eyes,
That with cœlestiall glory she did shine,
Brighter then Venus when she doth arise
Out of the waters to adore the skies;
The wooers all amazed doe admire,
And check their owne presumptuous desire.

11
Onely Antinous when at first he view'd
Her star bright eyes that with new honour shind,
Was not dismayd, but there-with-all renew'd
The noblesse and the splendour of his mind;
And as he did fit circumstances find,
Vnto the Throne he boldly gan aduance,
And with faire maners, wooed ye Queene to dance.

12
GOddesse of women, sith your heau'nlinesse
Hath now vouchsaft it selfe to represent
To our dim eyes, which though they see the lesse
Yet are they blest in their astonishment;
Imitate heau'n, whose beauties excellent
Are in continuall motion day and night,
And moue therby more wonder and delight.

13
Let me the mouer be, to turne about
Those glorious ornaments that Youth and Loue
Haue fixed in you, euery part throughout,
VVhich if you will in timely measure moue,
Not all those precious Iemms in heau'n aboue
Shall yield a sight more pleasing to behold,
VVith all their turnes and tracings manifold.

14
WIth this, the modest Princesse blusht and smil'd,
Like to a cleare and rosie euentide;
And softly did returne this answere mild,
Faire Sir; you needs must fairely be denide
VVhere your demaund cannot be satisfied.

My feete, which onely nature taught to goe,
Did neuer yet the Art of footing know.

15
But why perswade you me to this new rage?

(For all disorder and misrule is new,)
For such misgouernment in former age
Our old diuine Forefathers neuer knew,
VVho if they liu'd, and did the follies view
Which their fond Nephews make their chiefe affaires,
Would hate themselues that had begot such heires.

16
Sole heire of Vertue, and of Beautie both,
VVhence commeth it (Antinous replies)
That your imperious vertue is so loth.

To graunt your beautie her chiefe exercise?

Or from what spring doth your opinion rise
That Dauncing is a frenzie and a rage,
First knowne and vs'd in this new-fangled age?

17
Dauncing (bright Lady) then began to be,
When the first seedes whereof the world did spring
The Fire, Ayre, Earth, and water did agree,
