North to the Pole, south to the Pole
The whales of California wallow and roll.

They dive and breed and snort and play
And the sun struck feed them every day
Boatloads of citrons, quinces, cherries,
Of bloody strawberries, plums and beets,
Hogsheads of pomegranates, vats of sweets,
And the he-whales chant like a cyclone blares,
Proclaiming the California noons
So gloriously hot some days
The snake is fried in the desert
And the flea no longer plays.

There are ten gold suns in California
When all other lands have one,
For the Golden Gate must have due light
And persimmons be well-done.

And the hot whales slosh and cool in the wash
And the fume of the hollow sea.

Rally and roam in the loblolly foam
And whoop that their souls are free.

(Limber, double- jointed lords of fate,
Proud native sons of the Golden Gate.

And they chant of the forty-niners
Who sailed round the cape for their loot
With guns and picks and washpans
And a dagger in each boot.

How the richest became the King of England,
The poorest became the King of Spain,
The bravest a colonel in the army,
And a mean one went insane.

The ten gold suns are so blasting
The sunstruck scoot for the sea
And turn to mermen and mermaids
And whoop that their souls are free.

(Limber, double- jointed lords of fate,
Proud native sons of the Golden Gate.

And they take young whales for their bronchos
And old whales for their steeds,
Harnessed with golden seaweeds,
And driven with golden reeds.

They dance on the shore throwing rose-leaves.

They kiss all night throwing hearts.

They fight like scalded wildcats
When the least bit of fighting starts.

They drink, these belly-busting devils
And their tremens shake the ground.

And then they repent like whirlwinds
And never were such saints found.

They will give you their plug tobacco.

They will give you the shirts off their backs.

They will cry for your every sorrow,
Put ham in your haversacks.

And they feed the cuttlefishes, whales and skates
With dates and figs in bales and crates :
Shiploads of sweet potatoes, peanuts, rutabagas,
Honey in hearts of gourds:
Grapefruits and oranges barrelled with apples,
And spices like sharp sweet swords.

Part III.

St.
