Anusuya: O my Shakuntala, it is in thy society that the trees of our father Canna seem to me delightful; it well becomes thee, who art soft as the fresh–blown Mallicá, to fill with water the canals which have been dug round these tender shrubs.

Shakuntala: It is not only in obedience to our father that I thus employ myself, though that were a sufficient motive, but I really feel the affection of a sister for these young plants.

[Watering them.

Priyamvada: My beloved friend, the shrubs which you have watered flower in the summer, which is now begun: let us give water to those which have passed their flowering time; for our virtue will be the greater when it is wholly disinterested.

Shakuntala: Excellent advice! [Watering other plants.

King Dushyant: [Aside in transport.

] How! is that Kanva's daughter, Shakuntala?

–[With surprise.

] –The venerable sage must have an unfeeling heart, since he has allotted a mean employment to so lovely a girl, and has dressed her in a coarse mantle of woven bark.

He, who could with that so beautiful a creature, who at first sight ravishes my soul, should endure the hardships of his austere devotion, would attempt, I suppose, to cleave the hard wood Samì with a leaf of the blue lotos (lotus).

Let me retire behind this tree, that I may gaze on her charms without diminishing her confidence.

[He retires.

Shakuntala: My friend Priyamvada has tied this mantle of bark so closely over my bosom that it gives me pain: Anusúuya, I request you to untie it.

[Anusuya unties the mantle.

Priyamvada: [Laughing.

] Well, my sweet friend, enjoy, while you may, that youthful prime, which gives your bosom so beautiful a swell.

King Dushyant: [Aside.

] Admirably spoken, Priyamvada! No; her charms cannot be hidden, even though a robe of intertwisted fibres be thrown over her shoulders, and conceal a part of her bosom, like a veil of yellow leaves enfolding a radiant flower.

The water lily, though dark moss may settle on its head, is nevertheless beautiful; and the moon with dewy beams is rendered yet brighter by its black spots.

The bark itself acquires elegance from the features of a girl with antelope's eyes, and rather augments than diminishes my ardour.

Many are the rough stalks which support the water lily; but many and exquisite are the blossoms which hang on them.

Shakuntala: [Looking before her.

] Yon Amra tree, my friends, points with the finger of its leaves, which the gale gently agitates, and seems inclined to whisper some secret.

I will go near it.

[They all approach the tree.

Priyamvada: O my Shakuntala, let us remain some time in this shade.

Shakuntala: Why here particularly?

Priyamvada: Because the Amra tree seems wedded to you, who are graceful as the blooming creeper which twines round it.

Shakuntala: Properly are you named Priyamvada, or speaking lovingly (kindly).

King Dushyant: [Aside.

] She speaks truly.

Yes; her lip glows like the tender leaflet; her arms resemble two flexible stalks; and youthful beauty shines, like a blossom, in all her lineaments.

Anusuya: See, my Shakuntala, how yon fresh Malicá, which you have surnamed Vanàdósini, or Delight of the Grove, has chosen the sweet Amra for her bridegroom.

Shakuntala: [Approaching, and looking at it with pleasure.

] How charming is the season, when the nuptials even of plants are thus publicly celebrated! [She stands admiring it.

Priyamvada: [Smiling.

] Do you know, my Anusuya, why Shakuntala gazes on the plants with such rapture?

Anusuya: No, indeed: I was trying to guess.

Pray, tell me.

Priyamvada: "As the Grove's Delight is united to a suitable tree, thus I too hope for a bridegroom to my mind.

" –That is her private thought at this moment.

Shakuntala Such are the sights of your own imagination.

[Inverting the water–pot.

Anusuya: Here is a plant, Shakuntala, which you have forgotten, though it has grown up, like yourself, under the fostering care of our father Kanva.

Shakuntala: Then I shall forget myself.

–O wonderful! –[approaching the plant.

] –O Priyamvada! [looking at it with joy] I have delightful tidings for you.

Priyamvada: What tidings, my beloved, for me?

Shakuntala: This Madhavi–creeper, though it be not the usual time for flowering, is covered with gay blossoms from its root to its top.

Both.

[Approaching it hastily.

] Is it really so, sweet friend?

Shakuntala: Is it so?

Look yourselves.

Priyamvada: [With eagerness] From this omen, Shakuntala, I announce you an excellent husband, who will very soon take you by the hand.

[Both girls look at Shakuntala.

Shakuntala [Displeased.

] A strange fancy of yours!
Priyamvada: Indeed, my beloved, I speak not jestingly.

I heard something from our father Kanva.

Your nurture of these plants has prospered; and thence it is, that I foretell your approaching nuptials.

Anusuya: It is thence, my Priyamvada, that she has watered them with so much alacrity.

Shakuntala: The Madhavi plant is my sister; can I do otherwise than cherish her?

[Pouring water on it.

King Dushyant:  [Aside.

] I fear she is of the same religious order with her foster–father.

Or has a mistaken apprehension risen in my mind?

My warm heart is so attached to her, that she cannot but be a fit match for a man of the military class.

The doubts which awhile perplex the good, are soon removed by the prevalence of their strong inclinations.

I am enamoured of her, and she cannot, therefore, be the daughter of a Brahmin, whom I could not marry.

Shakuntala: [Moving her head.

] Alas! a bee has left the blossom of this Mallicá, and is fluttering round my face.

[She expresses uneasiness.

King Dushyant:  [Aside, with affection.

] How often have I seen our court damsels affectedly turn their heads aside from some roving insect, merely to display their graces! But this rural charmer knits her brows, and gracefully moves her eyes through fear only, without art or affectation.

Oh! happy– bee, who touchest the corner of that eye beautifully trembling; who, approaching the tip of that ear, murmurs as softly as if thou wert whispering a secret of love; and who sippest nectar, while she waves her graceful hand, from that lip, which contains all the treasures of delight! Whilst I am solicitous to know in what family she was born, thou art enjoying bliss, which to me would be supreme felicity.

Shakuntala: Disengage me, I entreat, from this importunate insect, which quite baffles my efforts.

Priyamvada: What power have we to deliver you?

The king Dushmanta is the sole defender of our consecrated groves.

King Dushyant:  [Aside.

] This is a good occasion for me to discover myself –[advancing a little.

] –I must not, I will not, fear.

Yet –[checking himself and retiring] –my royal character will thus abruptly be known to them.

No; I will appear as a simple stranger, and claim the duties of hospitality.

Shakuntala: This impudent bee will not rest.

I will remove to another space.

–[Stepping aside and looking round] –Away! away! He follows me wherever I go.

Deliver me, oh! deliver me from this distress.

King Dushyant:  [Advancing hastily.

] Ah! While the race of Puru govern the world, and restrain even the most profligate, by good laws well administered, has any man the audacity to molest the lovely daughters of pious hermits?

[They look at him with emotion.

Anusuya: Sir, no man is here audacious; but this damsel, our beloved friend, was teased by a fluttering bee.

[Both girls look at Shakuntala.

King Dushyant:  [Approaching her.

] Damsel, may thy devotion prosper! [Shakuntala looks on the ground, bashful and silent.

Anusuya: Our guest must be received with due honours.

Priyamvada: Stranger, you are welcome.

Go, my Shakuntala; bring from the cottage a basket of fruit and flowers.

This river will, in the mean time, supply water for his feet.

[Looking at the water-pots.

King Dushyant:  Holy maid, the gentleness of thy speech does me sufficient honour.

Anusuya: Sit down awhile on this bank of earth, spread with the leaves of Septaperna: the shade is refreshing, and our lord must want repose after his journey.

King Dushyant:  You too must all be fatigued by your hospitable attentions; rest yourselves, therefore, with me.

Priyamvada: [Aside to Shakuntala] Come, let us all be seated: our guest is contented with our reception of him.

[They all seat themselves.

Shakuntala: [Aside.

] At the sight of this youth I feel an emotion scarce consistent with a grove devoted to piety.

King Dushyant:  [Gazing at them alternately.

] How well your friendship agrees, holy damsels, with the charming equality of your ages, and of your beauties!
Priyamvada: [Aside to Anusuya.

] Who can this be, my Anusuya?

The union of delicacy with robustness in his form, and of sweetness with dignity in his discourse, indicate a character fit for ample dominion.

Anusuya: [Aside to Priyamvada.

] I too have been admiring him.

I must ask him a few questions.

–[Aloud.

] Your sweet speech, Sir, gives me confidence.

What imperial family is embellished by our noble guest?

What is his native country?

Surely it must be afflicted by his absence from it.

What, I pray, could induce you to humiliate that exalted form of yours by visiting a forest peopled only by simple anchorites?

Shakuntala: [Aside.

] Perplex not thyself, O my heart! let the faithful Anusuúya direct with her counsel the thoughts which rise in thee.

King Dushyant:  [Aside.

] How shall I reveal, or how shall I disguise myself?

–[Musing.

] –Be it so.

[Aloud to Anusuúya.

] Excellent lady, I am a student of the Véda, dwelling in the city of our king, descended from Puru; and, being occupied in the discharge of religious and moral duties, am come hither to behold the sanctuary of virtue.

Anusuya: Holy men, employed like you, are our lords and masters.

[Shakuntala looks modest, yet with affection; while her companions gaze alternately at her and at the king.

Anusuya: [Aside to Shakuntala] Oh! if our venerable father were present–
Shakuntala: What if he were?

Anusuya: He would entertain our guest with a variety of refreshments.

Shakuntala: [Pretending displeasure.

]Go too; you had some other idea in your head; I will not listen to you.

[She sits apart.

King Dushyant:  [Aside to Anusúuya and Priyamvada] In my turn, holy damsels, allow me to ask one question concerning your lovely friend.

Both.

The request, Sir, does us honour.

King Dushyant:  The sage Kanva, I know, is ever intent upon the great Being; and must have declined all earthly connections.

How then can this damsel be, as it is said, his daughter?

Anusuya: Let our lord hear.

There is, in the family of Cusa, a pious prince of extensive power, eminent in devotion and in arms.

King Dushyant:  You speak, no doubt, of Kausika, the sage and monarch.

Anusuya: Know, Sir, that he is in truth her father; while Canna bears that reverend name, because he brought her up, since she was left an infant.

King Dushyant:  Left?

The word excites my curiosity; and raises in me a desire of knowing her whole story.

Anusuya: You shall hear it, Sir, in few words.

–When that sage king had begun to gather the fruits of his austere devotion, the gods of Swarga  (heaven) became apprehensive of his increasing power, and sent the nymph Ménacà (Menaka) to frustrate, by her allurements, the full effect of his austerities.

King Dushyant:  Is a mortal's austerity (piety) so tremendous to the inferior deities?

What was the event?

Anusuya: In the bloom of the vernal season, Causica, beholding the beauty of the celestial nymph, and wasted (overpowered) by the gale of desire.

–[She stops and looks modest.

King Dushyant:  I now see the whole.

Shakuntala then is the daughter of a king, by a nymph of the lower heaven.

Anusuya: Even so.

King Dushyant:  [Aside.

] The desire of my heart is gratified.

–[Aloud.

] How, indeed, could her transcendent beauty be the portion of mortal birth?

Yon light, that sparkles with tremulous beams, proceeds not from a terrestrial cavern.

[Sacontalá fits modestly, with her eyes on the ground.

King Dushyant: [Again aside.

] Happy man that I am! Now has my fancy an ample range.

Yet, having heard the pleasantry of her companions on the subject of her nuptials, I am divided with anxious doubt, whether she be not wholly destined for a religious life.

Priyamvada: [Smiling, and looking first at Shakuntala, then at the king.

] Our lord seems desirous of asking other questions.

[Shakuntala rebukes Priyamvada with her hand.

King Dushyant:  You know my very heart.

I am, indeed, eager to learn the whole of this charmer's life; and must put one question more.

Priyamvada: Why should you muse on it so long?

–[Aside.

] One would think this religious man was forbidden by his vows to court a pretty woman.

King Dushyant:  This I ask.

Is the strict rule of a hermit so far to be observed by Kanva, that he cannot dispose of his daughter in marriage, but must check the natural impulse of juvenile love?

Can she (oh preposterous fate!) be destined to reside for life among her favourite antelopes, the black lustre of whose eyes is far surpassed by hers?

Priyamvada.

Hitherto, Sir, our friend has lived happily in this consecrated forest, the abode of her spiritual father; but it is now his intention to unite her with a bridegroom equal to herself.

King Dushyant:  [Aside, with ecstasy.

] Exult, oh my heart, exult.

All doubt is removed; and what before thou could have dreaded as a flame, may now be approached as a gem inestimable.

Shakuntala.

[Seemingly angry.

] Anusúuya I will stay here no longer.

Anusuya.

Why so, I pray?

Shakuntala.

I will go to the holy matron Gautami, and let her know how impertinently our Priyamvada has been prattling.

[She rises.

Anusuya.

It will not be decent, my love, for an inhabitant of this hallowed wood to retire before a guest has received complete honour.

[Shakuntala, giving no answer to go.

King Dushyant:  [Aside.

] Is she then departing?

–[He rises, as if going to stop her, but check himself.

] –The actions of a passionate lover are as precipitate as his mind is agitated.

Thus I, whose passion impelled me to follow the hermit's daughter, am restrained by a sense of duty.

Priyamvada.

[Going upto Shakuntala} My angry friend, you must not retire.

Shakuntala: [Stepping back and frowning.

] What should detain me?

Priyamvada.

You owe me the labour, according to our agreement, of watering two more shrubs.

Pay me first, to acquit your conscience, and then depart, if you please.

[Holding her.

King Dushyant: The damsel is fatigued, I imagine, by pouring so much water on the cherished plants.

Her arms, graced with palms like fresh blossoms, hang carelessly down; her bosom heaves with strong breathing; and now her dishevelled locks, from which the string has dropped, are held by one of her lovely hands.

Suffer me, therefore, thus to discharge the debt.

–[Giving his ring to Priyamvada Both damsels, reading the name Dushyant, inscribed on the ring, look surprised at each other.

] –It is a toy unworthy of your fixed attention; but I value it as a gift from the king.

Priyamvada.

Then you ought not, Sir, to part with it.

Her debt is from this moment discharged on your word only.

[She returns the ring.

Anusuya.

You are now released, Shakuntala, by this benevolent lord –or favoured, perhaps, by a monarch himself.

To what place will you now retire?

Shakuntala: [Aside.

] Must I not wonder at all this if I preserve my senses?

Priyamvada: Are not you going, Shakuntala?

Shakuntala: Am I your subject?

I shall go when it pleases me.

King Dushyant:  [Aside, looking at Shakuntala] Either she is affected towards me, as I am towards her, or I am distracted with joy.

She mingles not her discourse with mine; yet, when I speak, she listens attentively.

She commands not her actions in my presence; and her eyes are engaged on me alone.

[Behind the scenes.

] Oh pious hermits, preserve the animals of this hallowed forest! The king Dushyanta is hunting in it.

The dust raised by the hoofs of his horses, which pound tile pebbles ruddy as early dawn, falls like a swarm of blighting insects on the consecrated boughs which sustain your mantles of woven bark, moist with the water of the stream in which you have bathed.

King Dushyant:  [Aside.

] Alas! my officers, who are searching for me, have indiscreetly disturbed this holy retreat.

[Again behind the scenes.

] Beware, ye hermits, of yon elephant, who comes overturning all that oppose him; now he fixes his trunk with violence on a lofty branch that obstructs his way; and now he is entangled in the twining stalks of the Vratati.

How are our sacred rites interrupted! How are the protected herds dispersed! The wild elephant, alarmed at the new appearance of a car, lays our forest waste.

King Dushyant:  [Aside.

] How unwillingly am I offending the devout forests! Yes; I must go to them instantly.

Priyamvada: Noble stranger, we are confounded with dread of the enraged elephant.

With your permission, therefore, we retire to the hermit's cottage.

Anusuya.

O Shakuntala, the venerable matron will be much distressed on your account.

Come quickly, that we may be all safe together.

Shakuntala: [Walking slowly.

] I am stopped, alas! by a sudden pain in my side.

King Dushyant: Be not alarmed, amiable damsels.

It shall be my care that no disturbance happen in your sacred groves.

Priyamvada: Excellent stranger, we were wholly unacquainted with your station, and you will forgive us, we hope, for the offence of intermitting awhile the honours due to you: but we humbly request that you will give us once more the pleasure of seeing you, though you have not now been received with perfect hospitality.

King Dushyant: You depreciate your own merits.

The sight of you, sweet damsels, has sufficiently honoured me.

Shakuntala: My foot, O Anusúya is hurt by this painted blade of Kusha grass; and now my loose vest of bark is caught by a branch of the Curuvaca.

Help me to disentangle myself, and support me.

[She goes out, looking from time to time at Dushmanta, and supported by the damsels.

King Dushyant: [Sighing.

] They are all departed; and I too, alas! must depart.

For how short a moment have I been blessed with a sight of the incomparable Shakuntala I will send my attendants to the city, and take my station at no great distance from this forest.

I cannot, in truth, divert my mind from the sweet occupation of gazing on her.

How, indeed, should I otherwise occupy it?

My body moves onward; but my restless heart runs back to her; like a light flag borne on a staff against the wind, and fluttering in an opposite direction.

[He goes out.

Translated from Sanskrit by Sir William Jones
Translated in the year 1889
