Shakuntala  Act  1

King Dushyant  in a chariot, pursuing an antelope, with a bow and quiver, attended by his Charioteer.

Suta (Charioteer).

[Looking at the antelope, and then at the king]
When I cast my eye on that black antelope, and on thee, O king, with thy braced bow, I see before me, as it were, the God Mahésa chasing a hart (male deer), with his bow, named Pináca, braced in his left hand.

King Dushyant: The fleet animal has given us a long chase.

Oh! there he runs, with his neck bent gracefully, looking back, from time to time, at the car (chariot) which follows him.

Now, through fear of a descending shaft, he contracts his forehand, and extends his flexible haunches; and now, through fatigue, he pauses to nibble the grass in his path with his mouth half opened.

See how he springs and bounds with long steps, lightly skimming the ground, and rising high in the air! And now so rapid is his flight, that he is scarce discernible!
Suta: The ground was uneven, and the horses were checked in their course.

He has taken advantage of our delay.

It is level now, and we may easily overtake him.

King Dushyant: Loosen the reins.

Suta: As the king commands.

– [He drives the car first at full speed, and then gently.

] – He could not escape.

The horses were not even touched by the clouds of dust which they raised; they tossed their manes, erected their ears, and rather glided than galloped over the smooth plain.

King Dushyant: They soon outran the swift antelope.

–Objects which, from their distance, appeared minute, presently became larger: what was really divided, seemed united, as we passed; and what was in truth bent, seemed straight.

So swift was the motion of the wheels, that nothing, for many moments, was either distant or near.

[He fixes an arrow in his bowstring.

[Behind the scenes.

] He must not be slain.

This antelope, O king, has an asylum in our forest: he must not be slain.

Suta: [Listening and Looking.

] Just as the animal presents a fair mark for our arrow, two hermits are advancing to interrupt your aim
King Dushyant: Then stop the car.

Suta: The king is obeyed.

[He draws in the reins.
