Hermit: [Raising his hands.

] Slay not, O mighty sovereign, slay not a poor fawn, who has found a place of refuge.

No, surely, no; he must not be hurt.

An arrow in the delicate body of a deer would be like fire in bale of cotton.

Compared with thy keen shafts, how weak must be the tender hide of a young antelope! Replace quickly, oh! replace the arrow which thou hast aimed.

The weapons of you kings and warriors are destined for the relief of the oppressed, not for the destruction of the guiltless.

King Dushyant: [Saluting them.

] It is replaced.

[He places the arrow in his quiver.

Hermit: [With joy] Worthy is that act of thee, most illustrious; of monarchs; worthy, indeed, of a prince descended from Puru.

Mayst thou have a son adorned with virtues, a sovereign of the world!
Pupil: [Elevating both his hands.

] Oh! by all means, may thy son be adorned with every virtue, a sovereign of the world!
King Dushyant: [Bowing to them.

] My head bears with reverence the order of a Bráhmin
Hermit: Great king, we came hither to collect wood for a solemn sacrifice; and this forest, and the banks of the Malini, affords an asylum to the wild animals protected by Shakuntala, (Shakuntala) whom our holy preceptor Kanva  has received as a sacred deposit.

If you have no other avocation, enter yon grove, and let the rights of hospitality be duly performed.

Having seen with your own eyes the virtuous behaviour of those whose only wealth is their piety, but whose worldly cares are now at an end, you will then exclaim, "How many good subjects are defended by this arm, which the bowstring has made callous!"
King Dushyant: Is the master of your family at home?

Hermit: Our preceptor is gone to Sómatirt'ha, in hopes of deprecating some calamity, with which destiny threatens the irreproachable Shakuntala, and he has charged her, in his absence, to receive all guests with due honour.

King Dushyant: Holy man, I will attend her; and she, having observed my devotion, will report it favourably to the venerable sage.

Both: Be it so; and we depart on our own business.

[The Hermit and his Pupil go out.

King Dushyant: Drive on Suta.

By visiting the abode of holiness, we shall purify our souls.

Suta: As the king (may his life be long!) commands.

[He drives on.

King Dushyant:[Looking on all sides.

] That we are near the dwelling–place of pious hermits, would clearly have appeared, even if it had not been told.

Suta: By what marks?

King Dushyant: Do you not observe them?

See under yon trees the hallowed grains which have been scattered on the ground, while the tender female parrots were feeding their unfledged young in their pendent nest.

Mark in other places the shining pieces of polished stone which have bruised the oil fruit of the sacred Ingudì.

Look at the young fawns, which, having acquired confidence in man, and accustomed themselves to the sound of his voice, frisk at pleasure, without varying their course.

Even the surface of the river is reddened with lines of consecrated bark, which float down its stream.

Look again; the roots of yon trees are bathed in the waters of holy pools, which quiver as the breeze plays upon them; and the glowing lustre of yon fresh leaves is obscured, for a time, by smoke that rises from oblations of clarified butter.

See too, where the young roes (deers) graze, without apprehension from our approach, on the lawn before yonder garden, where the tops of the sacrificial grass, cut for some religious rite, are sprinkled around.

Suta: I now observe holy habitation.

Dushm.

[Turning aside.

] This awful (awe inspiring)sanctuary, my friend, must not be violated.

Here, therefore, stop the car; that I may descend.

Char.

I hold in the reins.

The king may descend at his pleasure.

King Dushyant:[Having descended, and looking at his own dress.

] Groves devoted to religion must be entered in humbler habiliments (garments).

Take these regal ornaments;–[the Charioteer receives them] –and, whilst I am observing those who inhabit this retreat, let the horses be watered and dressed.

Suta:  Be it as you direct! [He goes out.

King Dushyant: [Walking around and looking.

] Now then I enter the sanctuary.

–[He enters the grove.

] –Oh! this place must be holy, my right arm throbs.

–[Pausing and considering.

] –What new acquisition does this omen promise in a sequestered grove?

But the gates of predestined events are in all places open.

[Behind the Scenes.

] Come hither, my beloved companions; Oh! come hither.

King Dushyant: [Listening.

] Hah! I hear female voices to the right of yon arbour (tree).

I am resolved to know who are conversing.

–[He walks round and looks.

] –There are some damsels, I see, belonging to the hermit's family who carry water–pots of different sizes proportioned to their strength, and are going to water the delicate plants.

Oh! how charmingly they look! If the beauty of maids who dwell in woodland retreats cannot easily be found in the recesses of a palace, the garden flowers must make room for the blossoms of the forest, which excel them in colour and fragrance.

[He stands gazing at them.
